---
canonical_url: http://www.dyslexiaaction.org.uk/news/what%E2%80%99s-new-speech-assisted-reading
date: '2016-06-16'
id: da-20160616-whats-new-in-speech-assisted-reading
language: en
license: Unknown
original_format: html
source:
  name: Dyslexia Action Tech Blog
  url: https://web.archive.org/web/20170613010952/http://www.dyslexiaaction.org.uk/tech-blog
tags: []
title: What’s new in speech-assisted reading
---

About

This week we are starting a new series of posts dedicated to speech-assisted reading. Speech-assisted reading is one of the most powerful ways to access text for somebody who struggles with accessing traditional print. This could be because of issues with decoding such as dyslexia or because of issues with their sight.

Speech-assisted reading uses text to speech technology to take any text and read it out loud using a synthetic voice. Text-to-speech has been around for a long time (everybody has heard Stephen Hawking) but in the last few years it has become so good that anybody can use it to listen to text, even for novels.

We last looked at text-to-speech two years ago in a series on making your computer speak. Since then, many things have changed in the world of technology. There are new trends in how computers are used, new technologies that are available and some new software. Many of the principles have remained the same, so if you want to find out more about that go back and read the last series.

In this post, we will have a look at what is new in the world of technology that is relevant to speech-assisted reading. Specifically:

what is the same
quick overview of some of the larger trends in computing
key new technologies.

Next week, we will start a series of reviews of new products that everybody can use to assist their reading with the use of text-to-speech.

What is the same

The basic way in which speech-assisted reading works has remained the same for the last 20 years. You need two things:

synthetic voice (it is installed on your device the same way that font is)
software that can read out text using the synthetic voice (this could be on your phone or software package on your computer)

Two years ago, the quality of synthetic voices was already very high. And they are still very good today, if not better. They are definitely good enough to be the main way somebody consumes text.

New trends in computing

Last time we looked at text-to-speech, the world of computing was just about to change. But it was still very much similar to the way worlds were in the 1990s. Today, the change is progressing ever faster to a new world where we don’t buy expensive software once every three or four years and install it on our computer. Instead, we will be buying subscriptions to online services that work anywhere.

Software as a Service (SaaS)

One of the new trends is software that you don’t install on your machine. It runs as a service on a company’s server. You can then log into it from anywhere that has an Internet connection. Often this is accompanied by apps for mobile devices and sometimes there is an element that works off-line as well.

This has a lot of advantages for users:

the software you are using is always up-to-date
everybody has the same version of the software
the software is available everywhere you login
data generated by the software is automatically backed up online.

There are also some disadvantages, mostly related to when you are off-line. What may be an advantage for some and a disadvantage for others is pricing. That’s what we will look now.

Subscription pricing

Traditionally, you would buy a piece of software, install it on your computer, and own it forever. If there was a new version, you would have to pay an upgrade price. This meant that even with popular software like Microsoft Word, everybody had a different version. You can still use a version of Microsoft Word from 20 years ago today and do most of the same basic editing that you do with the latest version.

Now, more and more companies are charging a small subscription fee every month or every year. This makes software cheaper if you are used to upgrading regularly, but more expensive if you are used to owning your software for many years.

Software companies don’t do this just to make more money. Due to the fact that they almost always have to provide some online service as well (even if just to push regular updates), they have additional costs.

I would say that in general the trend is for cheaper software overall. That’s what we will cover now.

Lower prices

Two years ago, we were still used to paying a lot of money for software. That meant that for a lot of people, assistive technologies were not available.

Today, anybody can get started with assistive technologies for free or for very little money right away. That means they can try and see if the software is right for them, and they know that they will be able to afford it, if they choose to stick with it.

This is what makes speech-assisted reading cheaper now than it was before:

all new devices come with a high quality voice for free
the best speech-assisted reading experience is on mobile devices where even the most expensive commercial voice is only a few pounds
mobile apps cost at most 5 or 10 pounds where the old software would sometimes cost hundreds
even commercial services offer a so-called freemium model (a free tier) which means they are easy to recommend
hardware is now much cheaper and even the cheapest tablets and computers that you can get will work fine with almost any assistive technology.

Sources of e-books

It is now much easier to get an e-book to read with a synthetic voice. In particular, RNIB Bookshare (formerly Load2Learn) is a great source of school reading material. We will have a detailed review of it as part of this series.

New technologies
Mobile systems

By far the best way to enjoy speech-assisted reading is on a mobile device such as a phone or tablet. We have reviewed cheap phones and tablets in the past and they have now reached prices that are accessible for most people.

But using a tablet instead of a laptop to read your book with the assistance of speech, is a much more comfortable experience. And of course, you can always put the phone or tablet in your pocket and listen to your text while you’re out walking or doing chores at home.

Software has become apps and apps are much more user-friendly. They focus on doing one thing and they do it well.

Chromebooks

Chromebooks are the ultimate example of software as a service. They are extremely popular in the United States but they are also available in the UK. The entire computer works as a service. They are great for schools because they require no management. Students can log into any machine and always access their materials. They start up really quickly and their batteries last almost all day. They are also very cheap.

But they do not allow you to install any of the traditional software or apps. This also makes them extremely secure. With a Chromebook you do not have to be afraid of computer viruses. You can only use software that runs as a service or a Chrome browser plug-in.

So for a while the key accessibility apps were available. But now there are many ways in which they can also be made to speak with different plug-ins. Google has even promised that it will make Android apps work on books later this year. It is possible that they are the future of computers.

New voices

In the two years since the last time we talked about text-to-speech, there has not been a radical improvement. But voices have been getting slowly better and people have been getting used to them much more.

Innovation is needed to fix some of the most difficult issues (such as knowing whether to pronounce ‘read’ as ‘red’ or ‘reed’). But synthetic voices now sound natural enough that they can tell an engaging story without distracting the reader/listener.

Artificial intelligence (AI)

Everybody is talking about AI today. Computers know more about you and they can do things with that information. AI has not been applied to accessibility directly yet, we can expect that improvements in this arena will make its way to this world as well. Which means that we can look forward to apps that understand better the text they are reading and can decide on how best to read it out to us.

Next time

Next week, we will start a series of reviews of text-to-speech products. The first thing we will look at is a new feature in iPhones and iPads called Speak Screen.

Image credits

Images in this post are licensed under CC0 from Pixabay.

Tech Thursday is written by Dominik Lukes - Education and Technology Specialist